Add more information about debugging logs (#551)
getditto/docs: docs/common/troubleshooting.mdx

---
title: 'Troubleshooting'
---

import SnippetGroup from '@site/src/components/SnippetGroup';

# Troubleshooting

> If you are having a problem with Ditto, first follow this guide.

Reviewer: This line, "**_If you are experiencing an issue with peer-to-peer data sync; that is, a Small Peer (client) is failing to synchronize data with the Big Peer (cloud server), ..._**", seems to define peer-to-peer data sync as a Small Peer to Big Peer operation, whereas peer-to-peer data sync is a feature of Ditto irrespective of whether Big Peer is one of the peers. If we're talking specifically about problems syncing data between a small peer and a big peer, we might express it more explicitly; something like, "**_If you are having problems syncing data between a Small Peer and a Big Peer..._**".

Also, I think referring to Small Peer as client and Big Peer as cloud server may imply that the relationship is closer to a conventional client/server relationship than it actually is. Both Small Peer and Big Peer are clients, in that they are "peers", or even "nodes", on a mesh. Data is replicated in both directions by both peers, and what distinguishes them is:  
1. the only available Big Peer transport is a websocket connection over a WAN,   
2. the Big Peer storage resources are vast/unlimited compared to Small Peer device resources, and by virtue of which, "greedily" consumes data from Small Peers versus "opportunistically", and  
3. is architected with failover, load balancing, and other attributes of a robust distributed cloud system.

(I hope to be corrected if the foregoing is incorrect or misleading; it is to the best of my vantage point on the learning curve.)

> If you are having a problem with Ditto, first follow this guide.

Author: Yes we also have a longer term initiative to deploy a big peer on the edge as an on-prem server (although still in development) so shying away from cloud server makes sense

## Reading the logs

> First, you'll want to gather some debugging logs so you can see what's happening.

Author: We already support debug and verbose logging, so I think it's a little confusing to say "additional log levels for more granular diagnostic information is coming soon"

By default, Ditto only logs errors and warnings. We want to increase the log level so that we see more information.

> ### Setting the logs to Debug Level

Reviewer: Not from wanting to be contentious, but from wanting to understand the rules, why is "Logs" capitalized here? Is it to differentiate between "log" as noun and "log" as verb? Or is it because it's in a title in which all important words are capitalized?

```

However, the small peer has not yet established a successful connection with
this Big Peer instance quite yet. In order to verify that the connection has
succeeded, you will see that the connection has succeeded with the
`ConnectionEstablished` event.  

```
peer_event = ConnectionEstablished(PeerConnection { id: 4, connection_type: WsClient, remote_announce: Announce { outer_protocol_version: Some('2'), os: Some(Linux), network_id: Some(1356909299), query_overlap_group: None, device_name: Some("Ditto Cloud") }, remote_peer_id: SiteIdAndPubKey([...])
```

You will then see that the underlying physical replication session has been
started with `phy started`. The remote key represents the public key
`pkSOME_BYTES` of the Big Peer instance you are connected to. 

> The following is just an example, and not a guaranteed static identifer.

Reviewer: I think `static`, in the context of the original, refers to an identifier which uniquely references some unchanging value, code element, or macro. For example, where `IPHONEOS_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET = 11.0` might be defined in a configuration file, somewhere else there could be code that references the `IPHONEOS_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET` static identifier to obtain the value 11.0. 

The expression _**the `pkSOME_BYTES` identifier may or may not be static**_ suggests to me that `pkSOME_BYTES` is an identifier, but which may not be depended on to exist at runtime, or that it may represent an unreliable value. But I think the intent of the original is more along the lines of,  "`pkSOME_BYTES` is an example of a static identifier that facilitates this explanation, but don't expect to find it in actual log statements".

```
phy started; remote = pkAocCgkMCh0wD6Y83qm2UHtiN6264Jivvimg6xdR778ODaKODFKw
```

And then you will see something like this as the final message that the WebSocket client has successfully connected. 

```
VirtConnElectedNewConn { new_conn: Some((4, WsClient)), old_conn: None }
```

### Verifying correct permissions

Once the peer is authorized, it will begin to print both the known local and
remote permissions for this peer at a regular interval (30 seconds). Local

> permissions refer to the current peer that is running on the device. Remote

Author: You can have multiple peers on a single device (a peer is a ditto instance)

> permissions refer to the current peer that is running on the device. Remote

Reviewer: I'm curious what would be a use case for multiple ditto instances on a single device, apart from maybe testing?

> permissions refer to the current peer that is running on the device. Remote

Author: I've seen people ask about this when they resell two different products that the customer can opt-in to (e.g., Chat, POS, KDS all as separate AppIDs)

> permissions refer to the current peer that is running on the device. Remote

Reviewer: Meaning, a single app that wraps multiple standalone apps?

> permissions refer to the current peer that is running on the device. Remote

Author: Yes!

```
Write txn committed; txn_id = 40; originator = User
```

and

```
Notifying a database change; transaction = 40
```

Then, ditto will print again the active subscriptions and permissions to the log as in the above section.

The small peer will then create what is called an "update file" -- you will see this in the logs as
```
Creating a sending update, sending_update_path = "pkA/pkB/sending_update"
```

pkA and pkB are the two peers involved in the exchange.

Once the update file has completed, you will see the following line, which
indicates that the local peer is ready to send the new update to the remote
peer. This time elapsed is only for local generation of the update file. The
local write still has not been syncronized to other peers.  

```
update creation done; since_index = 40; new_update_created = true; num_docs = 1; elapsed = 908us 708ns
```

Once the process has completed successfully on the local peer, you will see
```
No next update chunk to send - setting is_ready to false
No message to send
```

This indicates that the update file sync process has been successful, and the local replication process has completed.

> ### Troubleshooting

Author: Sounds good

### Online with Authentication

#### Check permissions

Verify this isn't simply a permission misconfiguration issue. Are you able to

> try the operations with global read and write permission to verify that sync succeeds

Author: Updated to specify

in this case? 

#### Did you follow the [tutorial](./security/authentication#tutorial)?

The tutorial is your best guide for implementing this correctly. See the [code on GitHub for a complete working example](https://github.com/getditto/samples/tree/main/authentication).

#### Is your authentication server behind `https` and open? 

#### Common mistakes

> 1. Ensure that Ditto's Big Peer server hosted in the United States on AWS can send a POST request to your authentication server. Send a POST request to your server with a JSON stringified body.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Send a POST request with a JSON stringified body to your server to ensure that the AWS-hosted Big Peer servers located in U.S. regions successfully send POST requests to your authentication server.
```

1. `authenticationExpiringSoon` and `authenticationRequired` both need to be
implemented according to the [sample
code](./security/authentication#creating-your-client).

> 1. Do not create subscriptions inside the callbacks. These callbacks are only

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Do not create subscriptions inside callbacks; only call callbacks when Ditto initializes and the client authentication certificate expires. ```

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is correct. :)

i.e. something is blocking `Internal`.

> This might not have any observable effect, but if it does, it is most likely to manifest as slow/unreliable Ditto Bus connections, an inaccurate presence viewer, or slow/unreliable multihop replication. Ditto's internal mesh presence component must persist an update every 30s for these systems to keep working. If presence can’t do this because it’s blocked by another write transaction, those systems will begin to to fail until presence can successfully write its next update. This scenario should automatically recover just fine once the blocking write transaction finishes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you observe slow and unreliable Ditto Bus connections, an inaccurate presence viewer, or slow and unreliable multi-hop data replication, a Write transaction may be preventing the internal mesh presence component to persist data in regular 30-second intervals. 

Once the blocking Write transaction is complete, the observed issue should resolve itself automatically. 
```

## Still stuck?

If you continue to have problems, please email us at
[support@ditto.live](mailto:support@ditto.live) or [login to your Ditto

> account](https://portal.ditto.live) to chat with the support bot in the lower

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
account](https://portal.ditto.live) to chat with the support bot located in the lower
```
